What is the position of the French marketing encyclopedia Mercatorgue?
Let's start with the definition.
I would like to refer to the famous definition of the French marketing encyclopedia Mercatorgue.
Positioning can be defined as a strategically justified choice,
with the aim of giving a particular attractive position to a product or a brand,
among other offers on the market in the consumer's consciousness.
The term positioning was first proposed by Mr. Trout.
Yes, it is his merit.
I would like to say that when I ask what word you associate positioning with,
I want to hear one thing, namely that positioning occurs in the consumer's consciousness.
It is what remains of your activity in the consumer's consciousness.
There are two directions of positioning, which, for example, the encyclopedia Mercatorgue considers.
The first is identification, which is what you plan to position, a product, a brand, a group of products.
And the second is differentiation, a term widely used by Michael Porter.
Differentiation is the definition of one or several features of a given offer,
which distinguishes it from offers from the same area of reference.
Today, the art of marketology is to find the right approach to the differentiation of one's business.
The traditional approach looked like this.
I often ask my students, please tell me what you are different from your competitors.
I am told quality, someone says price, someone says price-quality.
I usually refer to such a standard formulation, we have the best price-quality ratio.
And sometimes I ask these people, tell me, can your competitors say this?
And they answer, unfortunately, they often say so.
It is the art of positioning that is the most important for Russian practice.
And, to tell the truth, what is called today in Russia is a feature from this area.
How to come up with features, how to make a consumer come to a store or call my office.
This is the theme of positioning.
Look at this slide. Russian vodka. What is the difference?
Different kinds of vodka are sold in Russia, and note that their prices are very different.
Yermak is sold for about 59 rubles, and Kaufman Whitehall for 969 rubles.
This is not only due to the volume of the bottle, but also to something else.
As you know, the composition of vodka is absolutely the same, with slight differences in ingredients.
Therefore, in order to learn how to sell vodka for 378 or 969 rubles, a certain art is required.
And this art is related to positioning.
Look at how the manufacturers explain the difference between expensive vodka and cheap vodka.
In expensive vodka, the manufacturer claims that there are certain ingredients, that is, recipes that allow it to be distinguished.
But the Forbes magazine notes that the cost of these ingredients is so low,
at least it distinguishes itself in the best case for a ruble, if not for a penny.
But the final price is just incredibly different.
Before we get back to the topic of segmentation, I would like to dive into the story.
The basis of segmentation was first developed by the famous Harvard professor Michael Porter.
He has a whole theory of strategy as a market position.
For the first time, Michael Porter drew attention to the fact that a company, if it wants to survive in a competitive market environment,
must adhere to certain strategies.
Moreover, this is also applied to those companies that do not even imagine that such strategies exist.
If I want to survive in the market, the first strategy is to sell at the lowest price.
Many companies in Russia adhere to this strategy.
For example, the Euro network for a long time, or the American Walmart network.
It seems to me that the whole of China as a country adheres to the strategy of leadership in costs.
If we sell at a low price, there is always a buyer, whether it is the labor force or our product.
Because there is a huge segment of the economy class in the world.
But if for some reason you cannot sell at a low price, for example, your shareholder does not want to get a low profit,
or the market is ready to pay a higher salary, then you start working in a quadrant called differentiation.
Moreover, if you are a market leader, then you must demonstrate leadership in differentiation.
If you are a small company, then your strategy is called the focus of differentiation.
What does differentiation mean?
This is an explanation to customers why it is you that they should choose, not their competitors.
This is a very serious task.
And, for example, such a strategic approach assumes that leadership in differentiation is based on four important elements.
Let's look at the next slide.
You can sell your product more expensively than your competitor if you have a technical superiority of your product.
For example, your car has more options.
Your laptop has more options.
Your video camera has more options.
If this is not the case, then you can explain to your consumer that you have a higher quality.
Yes, if the product is in high demand, it can always be sold at a higher price.
Many consumers, when setting a price, are oriented towards the service.
And it is such customers, sensitive to the service, who are ready to pay more for it.
Therefore, another explanation of differentiation is complex service.
And finally, the fourth source of higher price, so-called differentiation, is the brand itself.
Porter called it the creation of value signs, the impression that the value of the product is higher than that of the similar product of competitors.
In fact, Porter expressed such a point of view.
If you sell a product at a high price, there are four reasons to explain to the consumer the technical superiority, quality, complex service and the creation of a brand.
But today the market is so saturated that for the first time we faced an unusual situation, which was noticed by another American, Jack Trout.
What did he note?
He noted the following thing, that the quality and orientation of the buyer is not the most successful idea of differentiation.
The 21st century shows an interesting thing.
Porter, who wrote his work in the 80s, said that if you sell a high-quality product or provide a good service, then you are worthy of selling a product at a higher price.
But Trout notes that the quality and orientation of the buyer is a common achievement.
What does it mean?
If today you are talking about quality, then many of your competitors will say that we also have high-quality products.
The world has changed so quickly by the 21st century that there is almost no place for low-quality products.
Everyone makes a high-quality product.
The other thing is that some have less functional characteristics, others have more of this product or service.
Therefore, to say that you have a high-quality product is not original, you do not stand out from the consciousness of the consumer.
The second thing is that many in Russia are still convinced that the reason for a higher price is the orientation of the buyer in the service.
Some say that we have a good service, but Jack Trout notes that today the whole world understands that it is impossible to kick a client.
You need to try to create a client-oriented company.
Therefore, today there are more and more companies on the market that provide good service.
Trout is the first to draw the conclusion that the quality and orientation of the buyer are not the most successful idea of differentiation.
Too many competitors play this role.
The second element is that creativity should not be considered as an idea of differentiation.
Creativity itself or creative marketing is a very good marketing to push a product in a very short period of time.
This is a mistake of Russian marketers and companies that are looking for a new stock to increase their sales.
But this way we do not differentiate our product, we are more likely to push customers to make another purchase.
Moreover, the Western world is very happy to observe Russian creativity, which is often limited to some criminality.
I will not comment on this fact, but creativity itself, if it creates differentiation, is very often not easy.
The third point is that the price is not the most successful idea of differentiation.
Trout has an interesting fact.
You can, of course, differentiate based on the price pyramid and find that niche in which your competitor is absent.
But often the price is not the source of choice for the customer.
Even a high price does not mean that you will buy this product.
Although many people associate this with a fairly high quality and service.
And finally, the last point is that the range of the assortment is not the easiest way of differentiation.
Many distributors are proud of their full stock and wide range.
But you understand that the stock is an additional difficulty in capital turnover and, accordingly, in profitability.
Thus, a new approach, which is declared by Mr. Jack Trout, is that if you want to differentiate,
you have the opportunity within the so-called 8 directions that he comments on.
Look at some of them, and I think this is a very justified recommendation.
The first direction is called the ownership of the attribute.
Each of us thinks about what attribute of his product or service is defining for the client.
Usually we do the following.
I ask you to name several parameters of your service or product that are very significant for the client.
This is what the client says when he negotiates with you about a deal.
Or he asks about it in the store, whether it is present.
Or, one way or another, he compares this attribute with the attributes of your competitors.
The ownership of the attribute is the basis of the so-called positioning map,
which shows how the company differs from the competitor.
I can show you several examples of this.
Look at this picture.
Even most of the successful companies or trading brands have succeeded
in creating one attribute,
in choosing one word that catches the consumer's attention and makes him or her aware of it.
Volvo has been associated with safety for many years.
Most of my listeners today, when I say the word Volvo,
speak primarily about safety.
What happened?
The company created an image,
got into people's heads,
and introduced one attribute, safety.
Mercedes is associated with engineering, BMW with managability,
Domino pizza with delivery to the house,
Pepsi Cola with youth,
and Nordstrom with service.
These are examples of attributes.
My comment is as follows.
Even if a successful company tries to find one attribute,
it is difficult to find one attribute that Mr. Traut refers to.
Because two attributes are often a very laborious process,
financially demanding.
Why?
Because it is more and more difficult for the consumer to remember several differences of yours.
Ask yourself a simple question.
What one word would the consumer say about your company or about you?
This is your positioning.
This is the attribute that got into your head,
got into his head about you.
This is a small exercise that Peter Drucker refers to.
It is very useful for a beginner.
Because marketing starts with what the client thinks about you.
If the client thinks that you are a reliable company,
this is your positioning.
If the client thinks that you are a non-commercial company,
this is also your positioning.
And if the client, God forbid, thinks that you are a slave,
Let's move on to the next slide.
This slide shows a positioning map in the delivery industry.
You have noticed that this map exists.
It seems to me that it is clear that every company should look for its own attribute.
What is it better at?
Look at the axis.
On the axis of abscissa, the horizontal axis,
the rational and emotional influence of the brand is noted.
And on the axis of the coordinates,
the large and small companies are noted.
The medium and small companies.
You see that DHL, a famous American company,
claims itself as one of the major companies
that refers to rational motives.
No one knows Russia better than us.
At the same time, FIDEX,
a major American company that delivers goods and mail,
claims that it is more positioned in the area of emotional values.
Take a break.
This is FIDEX.
You will notice how many Russian companies position themselves today.
You will see that they are not only small,
but in most cases they are in the quadrant of rational motives.
And only a few of them, for example,
try to find an excuse for their positioning in the impact on a person's emotions.
You can choose what touches you the most,
what interests you the most as a buyer.
In this slide, I wanted to show you the kitchen,
namely, the marketing technology for positioning,
finding an attribute, differentiation.
I brought this slide from Columbia University.
It shows how a famous company Visa,
with its Visa card,
tried to enter the market and withdraw from its competitors,
Discovery and American Express.
You have noticed that the kitchen is the same,
it is a search for one attribute.
The left column shows the criteria
by which Visa marketing company determined
what is the most important for the customers.
The consumer survey showed that the following attributes
are associated with the customer's card.
Low annual payment,
credit line,
low percentage of acceptance and purchase warranty.
Then the company concluded that there are two segments in the market
in relation to the credit card.
Pay attention, there is a segmentation.
The first segment accounts for 45%
and this segment is mainly interested in low percentage and credit line.
The second segment is more massive,
55% of the total, for example, of all Americans.
For this segment, acceptance is very important,
and then the purchase warranty and credit line.
Such studies can be conducted very easily.
They can make a small survey of their consumers
in relation to the criteria that are important for the purchase
and which of the criteria is the most important.
Then, by means of office analysis,
by the usual expert assessment,
the marketer tried to compare each of the parameters that are important for the customer.
Pay attention to the fact that Visa turned out to be good
in low annual payment and acceptance.
What does this mean?
This means that there are two attributes that are very important for the company.
But now, based on this study, it is very important to understand
how we position ourselves, what we differentiate,
which of these attributes.
And the company chose the fourth attribute, acceptance.
Its first slogans were, we are accepted everywhere.
This was very important, because the company was a leader in this attribute.
And most importantly, this attribute was very important for the second segment.
Why did the company not position itself as a company with low annual payment?
Pay attention, because there is no leadership in the attribute.
Discover also offers low annual payment,
but the most important thing is that both the first and the second segments are not interested in this criterion.
Thus, you see that companies are different,
marketers are looking for attributes, differentiation,
but at least each of them finds what they are better at,
and most importantly, what is important for the client.
Looking at the Discover card, you can see that it should be positioned based on a low percentage,
which is very important for the first segment,
and for American Express, its positioning should be based on a good credit line.
The first segment is also interested in this criterion.
So, we looked at some of the kitchen of what we call segmentation and positioning of services or products.
We return again to the picture, which is called 8 criteria for the differentiation of the trout.
I will go from top to bottom, giving comments, and we will stop at each of them in order to understand.
Mr. Trout has a famous assumption that if you want to differentiate,
and you do not have attributes that are important for the client,
and that stand out among other offers on the market,
then the second way of differentiation can be leadership.
This is an instrumental approach that shows the following fact,
which was highlighted, for example, in Europe and the United States.
Consumers prefer companies if they are leaders in the market.
Thus, a certain inner conviction is created,
that if I work with a company that is a leader, I am at least protected from arbitrariness or deception.
This led to the fact that companies are leaders because they attract additional clients.
The word leader is often associated with good quality, good service, reliability,
or other properties that are important for the consumer.
Therefore, differentiation based on leadership has become one of the important tools for the struggle for consumers on the competitive market.
Today, in Russia, for example, the Head & Shoulders company claims that it is number one.
Shampoo number one from Perhati.
This is just the tool of leadership.
For example, when Unilever puts number one on its deodorants,
this is also a tool of leadership.
For a long time, LG positioned its products in Russia and Moscow,
claiming that it is number one.
Number one in the production of microwave ovens, refrigerators, and the like.
Leadership is a very important tool.
But, to tell the truth, there have been a lot of deceptions in Russia related to differentiation based on leadership.
Many companies have started to claim that they are leaders based on the results of some poll,
or the results of some magazine, or made very brief comments about what they are leaders in.
Therefore, today, for example, in advertising, often when you see that the company refers to the fact that you are a leader,
you should probably be very careful about it.
So, the second aspect of differentiation is called leadership.
If you are a leader, it is enough to stand out from the rest.
Tell about it, but do not deceive your customers.
Third, differentiation based on distinctive heritage is one of the most common approaches.
Remember what products you bought,
by showing off, I say in quotation marks, that this product is produced for a long time in history.
What does it mean?
Many companies, in order to achieve the preferences and loyalty of their customers,
start using the tool called our history.
For example, the beer industry in most cases claims that this beer is produced for many centuries.
For example, Stella Artois claims so.
Czech beer manufacturers do so, or German.
This is exactly what is very important for the consumer.
Consumers want to join a certain history.
For example, the Swiss watch industry is exclusively based on the basis of heritage.
More than 400 Swiss watch manufacturers claim that their watches are produced for several centuries.
This gives them a chance to stand out from their competitors from Southeast Asia or America.
The idea of heritage is a very important element.
I would like to show you some examples of how tea companies are based on the idea of heritage.
Look, you can see this inscription on the packaging of Twining tea.
In 1766, Thomas Twining became a tea merchant on the London Strand.
Since then, the company has been operating at the same address, which is a surprising and unique event.
Now, as it was then, Twining tea gives the world an incomparable joy and satisfaction.
What is it?
It is nothing more than a marketing trick to gain a foothold in the consumer's consciousness based on heritage.
Yes, the company has been operating in England since 1766.
The most remarkable thing is that the company is trying to show its customers that the location of the company is a sign of value to it.
Let's look at another example.
This is what Twining tea writes about in its packaging.
Twining tea has been mixing our family tea for many years.
Legend has it that my ancestor, Count Grey II, received this unique recipe as a gift from his father when he left China.
A whole generation of my family enjoyed Earl Grey tea.
Today, I continue the tradition of this famous tea, which is known all over the world, called Twining's Earl Grey.
The signature is Count Grey VI.
This is one of the tools of differentiation based on heritage.
There is a very strong competition in the tea market.
More than 10,000 tea companies exist in different countries.
In order to adjust to each other, they have to use this approach very often.
The next tool of differentiation is the idea of specialization.
What does it mean?
Many companies are facing the need for specialization in order to survive in the competitive market.
It is very difficult to be universal today.
Moreover, it is almost impossible to cover all the processes.
Customers are slowly starting to prefer specialized companies that know their business better.
This created a need in some businesses, especially in those with a strong competition, to create specialized businesses.
I would like to give a few examples from Russia.
If you pay attention, the FM radio market in Moscow is significantly different from the FM radio market in the region.
If you come to Moscow, you will notice that there is a very specialized radio.
For example, Radio Chanson, Rock, Classic, Jazz, Humor.
Why is this important?
Because there are too many offers on the Moscow market.
A specialized company must give its position to attract listeners.
Such specialization determines their choice.
It is simply not profitable to be unspecialized.
The company loses its customer and loses its face.
Specialization becomes a very important element, for example, in small business services, doctors, lawyers.
Specialization is very important in the market of magazines and newspapers.
Specialization is very important in the market of repair equipment.
I think this method is more relevant for small Russian businesses.
The fifth approach that Trout recommends is called preferential, as a good specialization idea.
What does this mean?
If you want to withdraw from your competitor, try to find someone who has already used your product, and if he has a loud name, exploit this name.
For example, Omega watches are said to be worn by James Bond.
This is exactly the case when we use preferences.
For example, our watch is worn by Andrea Gassi, our watch is worn by Maria Sharapova or Anna Kurnikova.
What is this?
Or we supply our product to Ford's conveyor.
These are also tools of preference.
Most consulting firms are not shy to mention companies they have worked with on their websites.
Yes, this may be incorrect in relation to their former clients, but this is a necessary need to survive in competitive conditions.
So, preferences.
If you have a service list that Ford can give you, try to use this tool.
The product as a specialization idea.
What does this mean?
If you are an exclusive owner of a product, you can declare in your advertising that you are an exclusive distributor.
I can bring any trademark.
If you are an exclusive distributor in the region, why not tell your customers about it in advertising and not make up any more stories?
The newest development as a specialization idea is widely used in the IT industry.
This is a very fast-growing industry.
Of course, the creation of a new matrix, Winchester or some other peripheral always leads to some advantage.
My example with the Kokuya pen showed that this new development became one of the important differences for the company to sell it on the global markets.
The last, the eighth step is called hot goods.
What does this mean?
You did not notice that many e-stores sell household appliances, phones, software, or any products of widespread consumption begin to exploit this idea.
Hot goods is when the company lists the top ten best sales on its websites.
Hot goods is a very important element that many companies use to highlight a product on their shelf.
For example, the leader of sales, the best sales, and so on.
All this is an instrument that leads to the fact that we manipulate our seller, making him pay attention to one product or another, or to our company as a whole,
and make our differences more profitable in his eyes, in his head.
The last comment of Trout seemed very relevant to me.
The desire for growth can ruin the idea of differentiation.
Companies that grow fast face this problem.
They are too fond of growth and the growing market, and lose their differentiation, which sooner or later, like a boomerang, will hit their income in the future.
So do not forget when you start to grow, return to this table and say, why are you different from your competitors?
Because growth often alternates with decline.
And after that you will have to return to this and say, why should our buyers buy our products?
Why should they do this?
Thus, we have looked at several instruments of differentiation that create the basis for positioning of companies.
The result of all this is, of course, the development of an effective slogan that accumulates differentiation in your idea.
Look at a few examples that I show at my seminars to understand what the slogan is for.
Pizza Domino.
Within half an hour or at our expense.
A slogan that highlights one of the attributes that are very important for a company.
A company in the United States delivers its product within half an hour.
This slogan comes from the program of differentiation.
First, we have determined what is important for the client, then we have determined what we are better at.
And then we convey this to our client through the so-called slogan.
A short message that is attached to the consumer's consciousness.
And look, Domino has become so effective that today it has come to Russia.
And our Russian partners could not find anything better than to change the famous slogan of this company to our slogan.
Our pizza is just class, call us now.
Do you feel the difference?
If there is a clear differentiation and positioning, then there is absolutely nothing in this slogan,
except for the creative, to some extent, creative slogan in the form of a poem.
Avis Rente Car is a famous, you can say, classic slogan.
We are the second number, so it is more important for us to please you.
This is a reflection of what has happened in this industry.
Avis Rente Car has been competing with John Hears for a long time, a company that is a market leader.
And it is everywhere that it claims that we are number one.
And in order to get out of this situation, Avis Rente Car has proposed a very unusual slogan,
which is aimed at showing a good service.
Yes, we are the second number, we agree that we are not the first, so it is more important for us to please you.
Patek Philippe watches, pay attention, position themselves in such an attribute as the sale of watches to the next generation.
You pass your uniqueness to the next generation.
And finally, for me, a very important thing is the company UNISYS.
We often disassemble this case at seminars, how UNISYS is competing with its competitor on the market.
And it was nice for me to read, to learn about their case, their slogan, which is called, we have learned to listen.
A very important attribute, for example, in service.
The next slide shows some examples of how slogans are built in competitive industries.
For example, mobile communication is an example of this industry.
Not only is it an oligopolistic market, it depends very closely on advertising and positioning.
Find the difference and determine which slogan is more attractive for you.
The future depends on you, it is convenient with us, or people say.
Of course, there are pros and cons in each of them, but it is very important for me to know if there is some differentiation.
And can you tell from these slogans how you differentiate about the company?
I would like to show some examples of how modern marketologists are trying to use differentiation tools
in a very mobile market of hotel services, hotel business.
A famous company, Starwood, which has a network of hotels in its product portfolio,
has faced a competition that cannot be called anything but, for example, a competition of large beds, king size.
What does it mean? American hotels began to offer their clients either low prices or to tell that their beds are huge.
In 2005, a new marketologist came to this company, who offers a very unusual positioning,
which creates a difference in the network of Starwood hotels.
Take a look at Weston network. It is a network of expensive hotels.
The marketologist offers the following.
To create a key value of the update.
The guests are offered herbal drinks, candles should be lit everywhere and quiet music should be played.
Smoking is prohibited in these hotels.
In the morning, the gym with therapeutic baths is open.
And the new slogan, that's what you should feel, confirms the following.
The hotel offers a new look at life, an update of life for its clients.
The most amazing thing is that the ad shows a leaf and lotus flowers, waterfalls and not a word about hotel business.
The second slide shows how the network of Starwood hotels was repositioned.
Here is the key value of the update.
The network has signed a contract with Yahoo.
Now the guests can use free Wi-Fi, download music and print documents.
And the slogan that represents this strategy is «Don't part with your business».
The third slide is the same company «4 Points».
The key value of the convenience is that the guests get free drinking water, coffee and the most amazing thing is a rounded price.
And the slogan is «You deserve an honest relationship».
It's not a secret that marketing marketers always try to manipulate our consciousness by creating unrounded numbers.
And the example of unrounded numbers of 4 Points deserves trust.
I would like to say a few words about marketing services and the differentiation and positioning of marketing services.
Many Russian companies are not food manufacturers.
Small and medium-sized businesses are business services.
It concerns restaurants, shops and wholesale and retail activities.
And we face an unusual element here.
We face the need to position ourselves, on the other hand, with the difficulties of what is called «your own service».
The difference between a service and a product is that a service simultaneously implies both the material and non-material part of a person.
If any of you have studied marketing in detail before, for example, at the university or at separate seminars,
you probably know that a service is characterized by the property of «non-permanence of quality».
What does it mean?
If people are involved in the business process, they are not ready to perform the same procedure with the «permanence of quality» as automated robots.
For example, we come to the same restaurant and get a different quality dish.
We come to the same hairdresser and get a different haircut.
This «non-permanence of quality» leads to the fact that when we talk about the differentiation and positioning of services,
we face the need for the inseparability of the company's activities and marketing.
This is a very important element.
Marketing as a function of one or two people in the company, in industrial companies, is replaced by marketing of all services.
If you open a restaurant, hotel, hairdresser or store, you know that your marketing and advertising are worthless
if your employees who contact the client do not demonstrate a marketing approach to them.
The second feature of marketing services that we constantly encounter is that the service is not protected by patents.
Therefore, we observe a phenomenon in the service when competitors copy our slogans, innovations, approaches and positioning.
This is why marketing services require alternating approaches, a constant desire to keep the consumer in tension, a constant creativity.
You cannot, having once invented a slogan, be sure that customers will come to you for years.
You will have to push them to come to you all the time with a new approach based on one of the eight models of differentiation.
The third problem of differentiation and positioning of services is that in marketing services,
control over the interaction of the client's employee is very difficult.
This is what creates the basis for earning money for small business.
It is not an anonymous product, but a relationship with the employee and the client.
Since it is difficult to reproduce the quality of the employee's service, we face the fact that any bad mood can affect the client's service.
Therefore, there is a whole wheel of service that shows that if you want to have a good service, you must have motivated employees.
Therefore, the problem of controlling the interaction of the employee and the client is faced with how comfortable the employee feels today.
Is he not ready to pour his indignation at the boss or internal conflicts in the company on his consumers?
This is a very difficult problem because not a single supervisor and not a single company manager can be present all the time in the negotiation with the employee and the client.
The problem with the growth of the company is even more important for marketing services.
I said that in marketing services the most important thing is the person providing the service.
When a company grows, the previous differentiation, the previous ideology, culture of the company that creates the basis of differentiation begins to blur.
Therefore, fast-growing companies lose the most in differentiation and need it most in the new repositioning.
The problem of labor productivity is due to the fact that we cannot make a person do many times more than he does today.
Yes, we can buy more efficient machines, but we cannot make the waiter serve not 10, but 100 people.
The problem of innovation. It is not a secret that in marketing services, innovations are welcomed, but they can be offered much less than innovations in technology or production.
And finally, in any country there are restrictive standards related to work and personnel, and, accordingly, this suggests that this limits our differentiation.
We cannot provide a 24-hour service if employees have to go to work in 8 hours.
In addition, you understand that different employees provide different services.
The machine can work 24 hours, the employee cannot.
In this regard, I would like to tell a funny story. Bad news for business services.
If you are in business, the problem of positioning is very important for you.
You will have to compete with Nordstrom, Disneyland and McDonald's. What does this mean?
When we are engaged in service, we often have to do not only better than our direct competitors, but often do better than those service companies that our client encounters.
At my seminars, I often tell funny stories that happened in Seattle.
One of the banks that serves VIP clients encountered an unusual situation.
The annual survey of clients showed that they were not satisfied with the services of the bank.
The manager, who faithfully believed in the quality of the service of his company, was simply surprised by this.
He kept asking the marketer why they were satisfied last year, and why these clients were not satisfied this year.
This year we have improved our service much more. We bought furniture, trained our employees, installed coffee machines, and hung beautiful paintings.
When a marketing agency surveyed the dissatisfied clients, they found out that the clients were dissatisfied with the service of the bank only because Nordstrom opened in Seattle.
Nordstrom is a chain of shops that sells shoes and clothes.
The manager could not understand what Nordstrom had to do with it when the marketing agency brought this information to them.
If I come to a bank, I compare your service with the places where I was, the hotels where I was, the shops where I go to buy clothes, or the restaurants where I have dinner.
If we are engaged in business services, we often have to do our service no worse than the service of the companies that our clients visit.
You probably know this slide, I just wanted to comment on it.
There are three stages of product or service development.
1. Acceptable product. What does this mean? Our product must have minimum acceptable standards.
This was observed in Russia, for example, in the late 80s and 90s. What did this mean?
You only had to bring this product, and the hunger that the economy and consumers experienced was enough to grab this product, regardless of what quality you offer or what service you demonstrate.
2. Acceptable product. This is the stage of product development.
For example, in America, the times have changed from the early 1900s to the 1930s.
Ford was able to produce one car model, and this was enough for customers to buy it.
It was important for consumers to have a product of their own, and to be able to buy a cheap black car.
But the competition grew and the market became what is called an acceptable product.
The West has experienced this for decades, and Russia has quickly come to this.
What is an acceptable product? It is a response to the needs of the consumer.
Today, many companies face the problem of wanting to understand what the consumer wants, and to build a service or product to meet their needs.
This is where the mass marketing research comes from, and the demand for marketing activities.
The point is to understand what else the customer needs to buy.
But the most surprising thing is that Russia and the rest of the world are entering the third stage of product development, which is called an acceptable product.
What does this mean? It doesn't matter how you cut, it doesn't matter how you serve the customer.
It is important to surprise them.
You can't do better in your restaurant than in a competitor's restaurant.
Very often you don't have enough money for this, so try to do it differently.
Service is the area where real wars for differentiation begin.
The conclusion is not to think about how to do something better, but to think about how to do it differently.
This is the area that created the school called the Blue Kenan strategy.
Do it differently, and only then will you find a new niche and be able to make money.
Don't repeat the competitor. You didn't have time, you were late. You need to do something differently.
Commenting on the fact that in service you have to compete with other organizations, not with competitors, I would like to show you the famous matrix of the 5-force competitor's porter and the added idea of Groove.
If you want to survive in this market, the famous CEO of Intel said, if you want to survive, you have to learn to make your products differently.
This is the most correct way of differentiation.
Don't do it like others, it won't help you survive.
Do it differently. Do it differently. Service in a restaurant, in a hotel, do your seminars differently.
Thus, we finish this topic and move on to the next slide.
8 ways to improve your business.
I think this slide is very instructive to say what can be done to get rid of competitors.
If you are a small and medium-sized business, you will have an idea of how to adjust to the consumer's consciousness.
The first step is to bring elements of your hobby into your business.
This is especially true for restaurants or services.
If you collect coins, try to show them to your clients.
If you collect silver utensils, spoons, teapots, samovars, decorate the interior of your restaurant.
It is your hobby that makes your business irreplaceable, unique.
This is often true for services, whether it is hotels, hairdressers, restaurants, or a training center.
Remember, your hobby will tell you how to make your business unforgettable, and most importantly, unique.
The second thing that gives you an opportunity to position yourself well is the nonsense of your employees.
I wrote this in quotes, understanding how often we listen to our employees.
They often come up with very unusual ideas.
These ideas are the basis of what we call differentiation.
We teach our employees to see differently.
For example, Starbucks has heard from its employees that they can sell music discs in coffee shops.
This is also a difference that is very difficult to reproduce.
Bring in the element of scandal.
The experience of the Euro network in Russia shows that we can often adapt to the competition with scandal.
Scandal can be of different nature, both decent and indecent.
The experience of the Euro network has shown that Russia values this scandal, even some kind of sloppiness.
Of course, I do not call for such body art, which the Euro network demonstrated in its PR promotions.
Nevertheless, some element of scandal always attracts customers, making them talk about you.
Change one of the elements of business sharply.
This is a very important tool for adapting to competitors.
If we talk seriously about this, the model of changing four elements of business appeared for the first time in the framework of the Blue Ocean School.
Think about what needs to be done to adapt to competitors.
Change the price, change the workplace, change the office, the location of the business, or something else.
For example, cashier and cashier.
Can you imagine a store without a cashier?
Yes, Walmart. Today, in the United States, Walmart offers such a system.
You made a purchase and you do not need a cashier. You can pay automatically.
The same applies, for example, to what would happen to your business if you removed your office.
For example, you opened a hairdresser's and removed your office.
There is no room at all.
Will business change? Yes.
But you will not disappear. You will leave others.
Because thousands of people repeat the same thing.
They remove the square, place chairs there and start cutting.
Think about what would happen if you did not remove the square.
Dig in the old.
I think this is the most interesting.
Today is the most interesting move.
In Russia, people are more and more interested in their history and in the use of some elements of antiquity in their business.
Old literatures, imitation of antiquity, legends, what Tvanins does.
All this creates a certain aura, what we call differentiation.
It gets into people's brains.
Make your cherished dream come true.
This is another piece of advice.
Of course, some of us have hobbies, but some of us have dreams.
Someone dreamed of being an artist.
Someone dreamed of becoming a poet.
You can bring this dream into your business.
You know, the symbiosis of two elements creates what we call unusuality.
At the junction of new hobbies, new approaches, what is very difficult to reproduce is born.
Listen to the complaints of your clients.
I think this is one of the most important elements in building your business correctly.
Often, complaints from clients are not just complaints, they are priceless tips.
Sometimes, people should be paid for complaints.
Because they gave you advice for free.
What to do to improve your business.
How often we take it with some rejection.
Thinking that we are offended or want to point out something bad.
But in reality, we hear something more.
We see ways to develop business.
For me, it is very important when people say, we would like to hear this.
We are not interested in this.
I see how people are interested in this.
And then I start thinking quickly about how to change this in my training programs.
And the last step is very important.
When you look in a neighboring restaurant and hairdresser, you better not do it.
It is no longer interesting.
No one needs such a benchmark.
A real benchmark starts when you look in neighboring areas.
Usually, new products, unusual differentiation appears when we are completely different.
We borrow something from another sphere.
I always ask the question, what can you borrow for a training business?
Where to copy from?
Yes, you can go to the trainings of other coaches.
But we will not do anything better from this.
We can repeat what a successful coach has done.
But maybe you need to go to a neighboring industry and see how they do it.
What is related to training? What kind of business?
For example, it can be a show business.
Therefore, go to a concert or a theater.
See how these companies do it.
And bring this element.
The task is to adjust to other competitors.
Learn to be interested not only in what you do,
but look for ideas around your business in adjacent industries that resemble your business.
Thus, we have gone through 8 ways to improve your business.
Each of which can disquiet you from the competitor.
Catch you in your mind as an unusual company that needs to be addressed once again.
Let's move on to the next slide.
I wanted to show you funny ways to focus some Western companies.
I hope they will be interesting for you.
Look.
IKEA today claims that it is not a furniture manufacturer,
but a company that strives to make everyday life better.
Disney claims that it does not produce movies and even amusement parks,
but makes people happy.
But the funniest are two famous TV manufacturers, Sony and Ben Contolofsen.
These companies claim that...
Actually, they are not a manufacturer of household electronics.
Sony, it turns out, perfects miniature art.
And Ben Contolofsen, a famous Danish company that produces unusually expensive TVs,
claims that it perfects the art of poetry.
When I stand in front of Ben Contolofsen TV once again,
I always remember whether it is poetry.
That is why these TVs cost 10,000 dollars, not 2,000 like Sony.
And finally, look at the funny way Absolut positions itself.
It claims that our consumer should feel like a sensible,
intelligent and creative person because he drinks Absolut.
So, I wanted to show you that there are some approaches
that treat what customers come to us for in a completely different way.